Create a docs page about adding code beyond starter files (#3852)
kedro-org/kedro: docs/source/kedro_project_setup/code_beyond_starter_files.md

While those may be sufficient for a small project, they quickly become large, hard to
read and collaborate on as your codebase grows.
Those files also sometimes make new users think that Kedro requires code
to be located only in those starter files, which is not true.

This section elaborates what are the Kedro requirements in terms of organising code
in files and modules.
It also provides examples of common scenarios such as sharing utilities between
pipelines and using Kedro in a monorepo setup.

## Where does Kedro look for code to be located

The only technical constraint for arranging code in the project is that `pipeline_registry.py`
file must be located in `<your_project>/src/<your_project>` directory, which is where
it is created by default.

This file must have a `register_pipelines()` function that returns a `tp.Dict[str, Pipeline]`
mapping from pipeline name to corresponding `Pipeline` object.

Other than that, **Kedro does not impose any constraints on where you should keep files with
`Pipeline`s, `Node`s, or functions wrapped by `node`**.

```{note}
You actually can make Kedro look for pipeline registry in a different place by modifying the

> `__main__.py` file of your project, but such advanced customizations are not in scope of this article.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`__main__.py` file of your project, but such advanced customisations are not in scope for this section.
```

```

> This being the only constraint means that you can, for example:

Reviewer: It would be great if the points below are linked to the section that describe them in more detail. A bit like how we setup the configuration page with "how to.." https://kedro--3852.org.readthedocs.build/en/3852/configuration/configuration_basics.html#how-to-use-kedro-configuration

Author: Thanks Merel, great suggestion, just implemented this. Rendered build [here](https://kedro--3852.org.readthedocs.build/en/3852/kedro_project_setup/code_beyond_starter_files.html).

* Add `utils.py` file to a pipeline folder and import utilities defined by multiple
  functions in `nodes.py`.
* Delete or rename a default `nodes.py` file, split it into multiple files or modules.

> * Instead of having a single `pipeline.py` in your pipeline folder, split it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Instead of having a single `pipeline.py` in your pipeline folder, split it, for example, 
```

  into `historical_pipeline.py` and `inference_pipeline.py`.
* Instead of registering many pipelines in `register_pipelines()` function one by one,
  create a few `tp.Dict[str, Pipeline]` objects in different places of the project
  and then make `register_pipelines()` return a union of those.
* Store code that has nothing to do with Kedro `Pipeline` and `Node` concepts, or should
  be reused by multiple pipelines of your project, in a module at the same level as the
  `pipelines` folder of your project. This scenario is covered in more detail below.

## Common codebase extension scenarios

This section provides examples of how you can handle some common cases of adding more
code to or around your Kedro project.

> **Provided implementations are by no means the only ways to achieve target scenarios**,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The provided examples are by no means the only ways to achieve the target scenarios,
```

> and serve only illustrative purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and serve only as illustrative purposes.
```

### Sharing utilities between pipelines

Oftentimes you have utilities that have to be imported by multiple `pipelines`.
To keep them as part of a Kedro project, **create a module (for example, `utils`) at the same
level as the `pipelines` folder**, and organise the functionalities there:

```text
├── conf
├── data
├── notebooks
└── src
    ├── my_project
    │   ├── __init__.py
    │   ├── __main__.py
    │   ├── pipeline_registry.py
    │   ├── settings.py
    │   ├── pipelines
    │   └── utils                       <-- Create a module to store your utilities
    │       ├── __init__.py             <-- Required to import from it
    │       ├── pandas_utils.py         <-- Put a file with utility functions here
    │       ├── dictionary_utils.py     <-- Or a few files

>     │       ├── visualization_utils     <-- Or sub-modules to organize even more utilities

Reviewer: Nit: we use UK spelling over US (https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/wiki/Kedro-documentation-style-guide)

```suggestion
    │       ├── visualisation_utils     <-- Or sub-modules to organise even more utilities
```

Author: Yeah thanks for this GitHub suggestion and all similar above. I saw this styleguide, and even did things like CTRL+F "ize" in a file, but for some reason did not clean it in all at once. So, my bad, fixing now :)

    └── tests
```

Example of importing a function `find_common_keys` from `dictionary_utils.py` would be:

```python
from my_project.utils.dictionary_utils import find_common_keys
```

```{note}
For imports like this to be displayed in IDE properly, it is required to perform an editable
installation of the Kedro project to your virtual environment.
This is done via `pip install -e <root-of-kedro-project>`, the easiest way to achieve

> which is to `cd` to the root of Kedro project and do `pip install -e .`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this is to `cd` to the root of your Kedro project and run `pip install -e .`.
```

```

### Kedro project in a monorepo setup

The way a Kedro project is generated may build an impression that it should
only be acting as a root of a `git` repo. This is not true: just like you can combine
multiple Python packages in a single repo, you can combine multiple Kedro projects.
Or a Kedro project with other parts of your project's software stack.

```{note}
A practice of combining multiple, often unrelated software components in a single version
control repository is not specific to Python and called [_**monorepo design**_](https://monorepo.tools/).
```

A common use case of Kedro is that a software product built by a team has components that
are well separable from the Kedro project.

Let's use **a recommendation tool for production equipment operators** as an example.

> It would imply three parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example consists of three parts:
```

# Adding code beyond starter files

After you [create a Kedro project](../get_started/new_project.md) and
[add a pipeline](../tutorial/create_a_pipeline.md), you notice that Kedro generates a
few boilerplate files: `nodes.py`, `pipeline.py`, `pipeline_registry.py`...

While those may be sufficient for a small project, they quickly become large, hard to
read and collaborate on as your codebase grows.
Those files also sometimes make new users think that Kedro requires code

> to be located only in those starter files, which is not true.

Author: Can you elaborate more on what exact change are you proposing here?
To reference this GH issue right in the `code_beyond_starter_files.md`?
Or to make content of comments on that issue part of this new section of docs?

> to be located only in those starter files, which is not true.

Reviewer 2: hmm... I am not the best person to ask for English but I'll try my best🤓

> While those may be sufficient for a small project, they quickly become large, hard to read and collaborate on as your codebase grows. Those files also sometimes make new users think that Kedro requires code to be located only in those starter files, which is not true.

I'd rephrase it to something like "When project become large, it may be beneficial to adopt a different structure or give pipeline files a more specific names." It is by convention (and `find_pipeline` use that convention), but not mandatory to name files `pipeline.py`

> to be located only in those starter files, which is not true.

Author: @noklam Your examples is specifically around **_pipeline_** files, while I wanted to convey 2 things here:

- As project evolves and `nodes.py` / `pipeline.py` files grow, they become challenging to manage.
- Good news is that you can rename and restructure them.

Do you disagree with those? I think the first one is just a fact based on how git diff works - if you have one big file, you're more likely to have merge conflicts, etc. And the second one, I wanted to cover not only the pipeline, but also node files there.

This section elaborates what are the Kedro requirements in terms of organising code
in files and modules.
It also provides examples of common scenarios such as sharing utilities between
pipelines and using Kedro in a monorepo setup.

## Where does Kedro look for code to be located

The only technical constraint for arranging code in the project is that `pipeline_registry.py`
file must be located in `<your_project>/src/<your_project>` directory, which is where
it is created by default.

This file must have a `register_pipelines()` function that returns a `tp.Dict[str, Pipeline]`
mapping from pipeline name to corresponding `Pipeline` object.

Other than that, **Kedro does not impose any constraints on where you should keep files with
`Pipeline`s, `Node`s, or functions wrapped by `node`**.

```{note}
You actually can make Kedro look for pipeline registry in a different place by modifying the
`__main__.py` file of your project, but such advanced customisations are not in scope for this section.

> ```

Reviewer 3: Indeed:

https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/blob/7391f4fc4ad31831bb5ff53f08a1cd5928df947b/kedro/framework/project/__init__.py#L279-L280

> ```

Author: Thanks. I removed this `{note}` and mentioned that `settings.py` also should be in the original location.

This being the only constraint means that you can, for example:

> * Add `utils.py` file to a pipeline folder and import utilities used by multiple

Author: @noklam how would you then call a `.py` file that is not `nodes.py` or `pipeline.py` for the purpose of this example? I was thinking of `dataframe_utils.py`, but didn't like it because it adds to the impression that Kedro is only useful in data processing projects, which isn't true.

> * Add `utils.py` file to a pipeline folder and import utilities used by multiple

Reviewer 2: There is many thing that I don't like about `utils` (just me, not a team consensus). The purpose is ill-defined and often become the place that people dump code to without thinking. 

Even if we go with utils. I will strip the `_utils` suffix, it feels redundant to have `pandas_utils.py` under `utils.py`. Then in the code I will probably do ` from <pacakge> import utils`. When I need to use it, I will use `utils.pandas.func` to make it clear that this is a util namespace but not `pandas`.

`visualitization_utils.py` could just be `visualisation` module itself.
(all above are subjective)

I think it will be great to first introduce the principle of share module, what are the factors to consider. Then you can show this example. https://kedro-org.slack.com/archives/C03RKP2LW64/p1716912123397259
@datajoely do you have thought about this?

> * Add `utils.py` file to a pipeline folder and import utilities used by multiple

Author: - Comments re: naming utils modules and importing them - addressed ✔️
- Re: introducing the principles, the hyperlink doesn't work for me, leads just to the `questions` channel.

  functions in `nodes.py` from there.

> * [Share modules between pipelines](#sharing-modules-between-pipelines).

Author: Isn't that exactly what I'm adding there?

<img width="846" alt="Screenshot 2024-05-25 at 12 47 31 PM" src="https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/assets/102987839/4b6f7eb7-941a-4a04-8402-d5916cadebef">

> * [Share modules between pipelines](#sharing-modules-between-pipelines).

Reviewer 2: The example is good, but I think we can link https://github.com/kedro-org/awesome-kedro/blob/master/README.md#example-projects to direct people for more examples. It's also helpful to see real code

> * [Share modules between pipelines](#sharing-modules-between-pipelines).

Author: I manually went through all Kedro projects listed there, I don't think there's any one that implements shared things between pipeline in a way that would be a good example to follow here. The closest one is this one: https://github.com/pablovdcf/TFM_HADO_Cares/tree/main/hado/src/hado

>   Those could be utility functionalities, or your standalone module responsible for

Author: Done

>   the domain logic of the industry you work at.

Author: Done

* [Use Kedro in a monorepo setup](#kedro-project-in-a-monorepo-setup) if there are
  software components independent of Kedro that you want to keep together in the version control system.
* Delete or rename a default `nodes.py` file, split it into multiple files or modules.
* Instead of having a single `pipeline.py` in your pipeline folder, split it, for example,

>   into `historical_pipeline.py` and `inference_pipeline.py`.

Author: I agree that `historical` vs `inference` sound like candidates for leveraging same pipeline just different namespace. To avoid the confusion, I changed the example to this:

```text
If you have multiple large `Pipeline` objects defined in a single `pipeline.py`,
split them into separate `.py` files. For example, in `data_processing` pipeline
you may want to have `cleaning_pipeline.py` and `merging_pipeline.py`.
```

Is that better?

>   into `historical_pipeline.py` and `inference_pipeline.py`.

Reviewer 2: sounds good!

* Instead of registering many pipelines in `register_pipelines()` function one by one,

>   create a few `tp.Dict[str, Pipeline]` objects in different places of the project

Author: Done, there were 2 places where I mention `tp.Dict[str, Pipeline]`. Replaced to `dict` in both.

>   and then make `register_pipelines()` return a union of those.

Author: Added:

  ```{note}
  While Kedro features a [`find_pipelines()` functionality for autodiscovery of pipelines](../nodes_and_pipelines/pipeline_registry.md#pipeline-autodiscovery),
  for large projects you may want a finer control and register pipelines manually.
  ```

>   and then make `register_pipelines()` return a union of those.

Reviewer 2: My questions are:
- is `historical_pipeline.py` and `inference_pipelines.py` better than `pipelines/historical/pipeline.py` (the modular pipeline structure) that Kedro usually promotes?

I think this is a viable alternative, but if this is in docs instead of a blog. I'll probably change the narrative to: There is an alternative to register pipeline manually, explaining the `pipeline.py` is just a convention and for `find_pipeline` works automatically. User still have the option to register manually if desired.

@astrojuanlu thought?

| 3     | User interface (UI) application                                                                              | <ul> <li>This can be a [`plotly`](https://plotly.com/python/) or [`streamlit`](https://streamlit.io/) dashboard.</li> <li>Or even a full-fledged front-end app leveraging JS framework like [`React`](https://react.dev/).</li> <li>Regardless, this component may know how to access the ML model, but it should probably not know anything about how it was trained and was Kedro involved or not.</li> </ul>  |

A suggested solution in this case would be a **monorepo** design. Below is an example:

```text
└── repo_root
    ├── packages
    │   ├── kedro_project               <-- A Kedro project for ML model training.
    │   │   ├── conf
    │   │   ├── data
    │   │   ├── notebooks
    │   │   ├── ...
    │   ├── optimizer                   <-- Standalone package.
    │   └── dashboard                   <-- Standalone package, may import `optimizer`, but should not know anything about model training pipeline.
    ├── requirements.txt                <-- Linters, code formatters... Not dependencies of packages.

>     ├── pyproject.toml                  <-- Settings for those, like `[tool.isort]`.

Reviewer 3: Notice that having this astray `pyproject.toml` file here automatically communicates to `pip` that this is potentially a Python package. This has been an ongoing source of pain in the ecosystem, see my summary here https://github.com/kedro-org/kedro/issues/2280#issuecomment-1437071618

Now what's the best practice to manage tool configs in monorepos for Python given this issue... I have no idea, to be honest

Author: I removed `pyproject.toml` and rearranged it to this:

```text
└── repo_root
    ├── packages
    │   ├── kedro_project          <-- A Kedro project for ML model training.
    │   │   ├── conf
    │   │   ├── data
    │   │   ├── notebooks
    │   │   ├── ...
    │   ├── optimizer              <-- Standalone package.
    │   └── dashboard              <-- Standalone package, may import `optimizer`, but should not know anything about model training pipeline.
    ├── ...
    ├── ... Examples of what you may want in the repo root:
    ├── requirements.txt           <-- Linters, code formatters... Not dependencies of packages.
    ├── ruff.toml                  <-- Or configs for other tools that you want to share between packages.
    └── ...
```

# Adding code beyond starter files

After you [create a Kedro project](../get_started/new_project.md) and
[add a pipeline](../tutorial/create_a_pipeline.md), you notice that Kedro generates a
few boilerplate files: `nodes.py`, `pipeline.py`, `pipeline_registry.py`...

While those may be sufficient for a small project, they quickly become large, hard to
read and collaborate on as your codebase grows.
Those files also sometimes make new users think that Kedro requires code

> to be located only in those starter files, which is not true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be located in those exact starter files, which is not true.
```

> This section elaborates what are the Kedro requirements in terms of organising code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section elaborates on what the Kedro requirements are for organising your project code
```

in files and modules.
It also provides examples of common scenarios such as sharing utilities between
pipelines and using Kedro in a monorepo setup.

## Where does Kedro look for code to be located

The only technical constraint for arranging code in the project is that `pipeline_registry.py`

> and `settings.py` files must be located in `<your_project>/src/<your_project>` directory, which is where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and `settings.py` files must be located in the `<your_project>/src/<your_project>` directory, which is where
```

  functions in `nodes.py` from there.
* [Share modules between pipelines](#sharing-modules-between-pipelines).
  Those could be utility functionalities, or a standalone module responsible for
  the domain-specific logic.
* [Use Kedro in a monorepo setup](#kedro-project-in-a-monorepo-setup) if there are
  software components independent of Kedro that you want to keep together in the version control system.
* Delete or rename a default `nodes.py` file, split it into multiple files or modules.
* If you have multiple large `Pipeline` objects defined in a single `pipeline.py`,
  split them into separate `.py` files. For example, in `data_processing` pipeline
  you may want to have `cleaning_pipeline.py` and `merging_pipeline.py`.
* Instead of registering many pipelines in `register_pipelines()` function one by one,
  create a few `dict[str, Pipeline]` objects in different places of the project
  and then make `register_pipelines()` return a union of those.

  ```{note}
  While Kedro features [`find_pipelines()` functionality for autodiscovery of pipelines](../nodes_and_pipelines/pipeline_registry.md#pipeline-autodiscovery),

>   for large projects you may want a finer control and register pipelines manually.

Author: > why this is the case

Because sometimes you may want to use a more explicit name than `create_pipeline`, which is what `find_pipelines()` is looking for. "Sometimes" here is a situation when a single pipeline module needs to expose different pipelines. E.g. your pipeline module is called `profiling` and it exposes `profile_table` and `profile_ml_model` pipelines, something like that.

> is it sufficient if find_pipeline search for broader pattern

I guess it's a conversation for a separate issue on `find_pipelines()` potential extension?

  ```

## Common codebase extension scenarios

This section provides examples of how you can handle some common cases of adding more
code to or around your Kedro project.
The provided examples are by no means the only ways to achieve the target scenarios,
and serve only as illustrative purposes.

### Sharing modules between pipelines

> Oftentimes you have machinery that has to be imported by multiple `pipelines`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oftentimes you have functions that have to be imported by multiple `pipelines`.
```

To keep them as part of a Kedro project, **create a module (for example, `utils`) at the same
level as the `pipelines` folder**, and organise the functionalities there:

```text
├── conf
├── data
├── notebooks
└── src
    ├── my_project
    │   ├── __init__.py
    │   ├── __main__.py
    │   ├── pipeline_registry.py
    │   ├── settings.py
    │   ├── pipelines
    │   └── utils                       <-- Create a module to store your utilities
    │       ├── __init__.py             <-- Required to import from it
    │       ├── pandas_utils.py         <-- Put a file with utility functions here
    │       ├── dictionary_utils.py     <-- Or a few files
    │       ├── visualisation_utils     <-- Or sub-modules to organise even more utilities
    └── tests
```

Example of importing a function `find_common_keys` from `dictionary_utils.py` would be:

```python
from my_project.utils.dictionary_utils import find_common_keys
```

```{note}

> For imports like this to be displayed in IDE properly, it is required to perform an editable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For imports like this to be displayed in an IDE properly, it is required to perform an editable
```

| 2     | An optimiser that leverages the ML model and implements domain business logic to derive recommendations      | <ul> <li>A good design consideration might be to make it independent of the UI framework.</li> </ul>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| 3     | User interface (UI) application                                                                              | <ul> <li>This can be a [`plotly`](https://plotly.com/python/) or [`streamlit`](https://streamlit.io/) dashboard.</li> <li>Or even a full-fledged front-end app leveraging JS framework like [`React`](https://react.dev/).</li> <li>Regardless, this component may know how to access the ML model, but it should probably not know anything about how it was trained and was Kedro involved or not.</li> </ul>  |

> A suggested solution in this case would be a **monorepo** design. Below is an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A suggested solution in this case would be a **monorepo** design. Below is an example of such a project structure:
```
